China | Travelin’ man
Xi Jinping will at last venture abroad again
习近平将再次出访
Why is Central Asia his destination?
为何中亚是他的行程目的地？

Sep 8th 2022

By the time President Xi Jinping arrives in Central Asia this month, it will have been nearly a thousand days since he last left China. In the interim, much has changed—just look at his previous destination. In January 2020 Mr Xi visited Myanmar, where he signed some deals and shook hands with Aung San Suu Kyi, then Myanmar’s de facto leader. Today Ms Suu Kyi sits in jail, the victim of a coup carried out by the country’s generals.

直到本月习近平主席抵达中亚为止，距离他上次离开中国已有一千多天了。 回顾他之前的目的地——呆在国内的这段时间里，世界发生了太多变化。2020年一月，他访问了缅甸，他和该国的实际领导人昂山素姬见面并签订了一些合作协议。现在，昂山素姬已经入狱，她是该国军事政变的受害者。

Mr Xi stopped travelling abroad when China closed its borders in order to keep covid-19 out. The government still tries to contain the virus through strict controls at home. But Mr Xi has decided that diplomacy, at least, must start returning to normal. He plans to visit Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, where he will attend a summit of the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation (sco) on September 15th and 16th, and probably meet his friend Vladimir Putin.

当中国关闭国境为了阻止新冠肺炎流入国内，习进平停止了对外的出行。中国政府依然通过严格的居家隔离竭力控制病毒的传播。但是习进平决定必须让外交事务开始重返正常的轨道。他计划访问哈萨克斯坦和乌兹别克斯坦，他将出席9月15号和16号在那里举办的上海合作组织（SCO)的峰会，以及很可能会和他的朋友弗拉基米尔普京见面。

There had been much speculation about where Mr Xi would go. Kazakhstan makes sense. It is where Mr Xi, in 2013, launched the Belt and Road Initiative, a global infrastructure-building scheme. China has invested tens of billions of dollars in Kazakhstan, which sends back oil and gas through pipelines co-owned by the two countries’ biggest state oil companies.

坊间有许多关于习进平会出访哪里的猜测。出访哈萨克斯坦具有重要意义。2013年，习进平在那里启动了“一带一路”合作倡议，一个全球基础设施的建设方案。中国在哈萨克斯坦投入了数十亿美元的投资，世界上两个最大的国家石油公司通过合作的输送管道向中国输送了石油和天然气。

Kazakhstan is important to China for another reason: it borders the Chinese region of Xinjiang, where more than a million Uyghurs, as well as ethnic Kazakhs, have been thrown into camps for “re-education”. Much of the early evidence of those camps came from victims who escaped to Kazakhstan, where they were interviewed by activists—until the Kazakh government pressed the activists to stop. In public it has remained mostly quiet on the matter. China wants it to stay that way. But Chinese officials have struggled to read Kazakhstan. They were surprised by the protests, over high prices and dirty politics, that rocked the country in January, as well as by Russia’s decision to send troops.

哈萨克斯坦对于中国而言有着另一个重要的原因：其国境和中国的新疆接壤，在那里，超过百万的维吾尔人，以及哈萨克族人被送到“再教育营”。早前有很多的证据表明，那些集中营关押了逃往哈萨克斯坦的受害者，他们在哈萨克斯坦与社会活动人士见面——直到哈萨克斯坦政府敦促这些活动人士停止一切活动。在公开场合，哈政府对些事保持了沉默。中国政府希望该政府能保持现状。但是中国政府却难以理解哈萨克斯坦。他们对由于高物价和腐败政治而上街游行感到惊讶，如同俄罗斯作出派兵的决定一样，一月份的游行震惊了全国。


China has ambitions across Central Asia, where it has tried to build land-based trade and energy links as an alternative to sea-based routes dominated by Western powers. It long deferred to Russia on political and security matters in the region, but that is changing, says Niva Yau of the osce Academy, a research centre in Kyrgyzstan. “Everything that Russia does in Central Asia, China does too, just on a smaller scale,” she says. For example, thousands of Kyrgyz military officers train in Russia. A few hundred do so in China. Look around the region and there are other signs of its influence, such as a Chinese police base in Tajikistan and classrooms where Uzbek national guardsmen learn Chinese.

中国对中亚有其野心，在那里，中国尝试建立基于陆地为基础的贸易和能源连接以取代以西方大国主导的海上路线。该地区在政治和安全问题上长期依赖俄罗斯，但这一切正在发生变化，位于哈萨克斯坦的一个研究中心——欧安组织学院的Niva Yau表示，“俄罗斯所做的一切都在中亚，而中国也是，只是范围小一些。”譬如，数以千计的吉尔吉斯军官在俄罗斯受训。同样的数百人在中国受训。环顾这一地区，中国还有其它影响的迹象，譬如，比如中国在塔吉克斯坦的警察基地，以及乌兹别克国民警卫队在教室里在学习中文。

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine will be the elephant in the room at the sco summit. Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, has not endorsed Mr Putin’s war. Mr Tokayev and other Central Asian leaders worry about Russian encroachment on their own territory, which is one reason why they seek closer ties to China. But they will probably skirt the issue at the summit and focus instead on new railways and pipelines, as well as security. China wants regional powers to take the lead in cleaning up after America in Afghanistan.

在上合峰会上，俄罗斯入侵乌克兰将会成为大家都不愿提及的棘手问题。哈萨克斯坦的总统，托卡耶夫并不支持普京发动的战争。托卡耶夫以及其它中亚地区的领导人都担心俄罗斯会入侵其领土，这也是其中一个他们愿意与中国寻求更紧密关系的原因。但他们很可能会在峰会上避而不谈俄乌战争而聚焦在新的铁路和管道问题上，同时还有安全问题。中国希望区域大国能在美国阿富汗撤军后带头收拾残局。

For Mr Xi the summit is a chance to reaffirm his support for Mr Putin, and thumb his nose at the West, while avoiding the tricky optics of a state visit to Moscow. He will also have the chance to mingle with other leaders who, to varying degrees, share China’s world-view. Some analysts see Mr Xi’s decision to travel in the run-up to the Communist Party congress in October as a sign of confidence in his position, though there has never been much doubt that he will be handed a third term as party chief at the event. More trips abroad are expected in the coming months. ■
对于习近平而言，这次的峰会给了一个重申支持普京同时叫嚣西方的机会，同时避免了对莫斯科进行国事访问的棘手问题。同时他也有机会向其他领导人——不同程度地——宣扬中国的世界观。一些分析家认为，习进平在10月即将开幕的中国共产党党代会前作出外访的决定，是其权力稳固的一个自信的信号，尽量坊间有众多的猜测，他将会在这次的20大上进行第三任的党主席的交接。预计未来还有更多的出国访问。


This article appeared in the China section of the print edition under the headline "Travelin’ man"
ChinaSeptember 10th 2022
